'Build RBAC' guide for everything but Rust (#1122)
osohq/oso: docs/content/python/guides/rbac.md

---
title: Build Role-Based Access Control (RBAC)
weight: -1
description: |
  Build role-based access control (RBAC) with Oso's built-in authorization
  modeling features.
aliases:
  - todo
---

# Build Role-Based Access Control (RBAC)

> Role-based access control (RBAC) is so ubiquitous that Oso provides special

Author: removing 'special' for now — can discuss more with @samscott89 later

```suggestion
Role-based access control (RBAC) is so ubiquitous that Oso provides
```

The first step of building an RBAC policy is telling Oso which application
classes are **actors** and which are **resources**. Our example app has a pair
of **resource** types that we want to control access to, `Organization` and
`Repository`. We declare both as resources as follows:

```polar
resource Organization {}

resource Repository {}
```

Our app also has a `User` class that will be our lone **actor** type:

```polar
actor User {}
```

This piece of syntax is called a *resource block*, and it performs two
functions: it identifies the type as an **actor** or a **resource**, and it
provides a centralized place to declare roles and permissions for that
particular type.

## Declaring roles and permissions

In GitClub, users can perform actions such as `"delete"`-ing an organization or
`"push"`-ing to a repository. Users can also be assigned roles for either type
of resource, such as the `"owner"` role for an `Organization` or the
`"maintainer"` role for a `Repository`.

Inside the curly braces of each `resource` block, we declare the roles and
permissions for that resource:

```polar
resource Organization {
  roles = [ "owner" ];
}

resource Repository {

>   permissions = [ "read", "push" ];

Author: 423fb911

left the spaces in the `relations = { ... };` declaration b/c I think it looks better; lmk if you think we should standardize that as no spaces too

>   permissions = [ "read", "push" ];

Reviewer: How do we usually write `x matches {foo: 1, bar: 2}`? I think it should match that since it's a dictionary. I usually don't use spaces there

>   permissions = [ "read", "push" ];

Author: Spaces in every GitClub policy, FWIW:

https://github.com/osohq/gitclub/blob/7450d3466405b379843612e18048a249bdf46d53/backends/rails/app/policy/authorization.polar#L41

https://github.com/osohq/gitclub/blob/7450d3466405b379843612e18048a249bdf46d53/backends/express-typeorm/src/authorization.polar#L41

https://github.com/osohq/gitclub/blob/7450d3466405b379843612e18048a249bdf46d53/backends/flask-sqlalchemy/app/authorization.polar#L41

https://github.com/osohq/gitclub/blob/7450d3466405b379843612e18048a249bdf46d53/backends/flask-sqlalchemy-oso/app/authorization.polar#L82

syntax for modeling RBAC. This syntax makes it easy to create a role-based
authorization policy with roles and permissions -- for example, declaring that
the `"maintainer"` role on a repository allows a user to `"push"` to that
repository.

In this guide, we'll walk through building an RBAC policy for [GitClub][].

[GitClub]: https://github.com/osohq/gitclub

## Declare application types as actors and resources

Oso makes authorization decisions by determining if an **actor** can perform an
**action** on a **resource**:

- **Actor**: who is performing the action? `User(id=1)`
- **Action**: what are they trying to do? `"push"`
- **Resource**: what are they doing it to? `Repository(id=2)`

The first step of building an RBAC policy is telling Oso which application
classes are **actors** and which are **resources**. Our example app has a pair
of **resource** types that we want to control access to, `Organization` and
`Repository`. We declare both as resources as follows:

```polar
resource Organization {}

resource Repository {}
```

Our app also has a `User` class that will be our lone **actor** type:

```polar
actor User {}
```

> This piece of syntax is called a *resource block*, and it performs two

Reviewer: Maybe a note in here about registering these classes with `register_class`, could link to another guide for more detail.

Author: 1b10a4ac

functions: it identifies the type as an **actor** or a **resource**, and it
provides a centralized place to declare roles and permissions for that
particular type.

## Declare roles and permissions

In GitClub, users can perform actions such as `"delete"`-ing an organization or
`"push"`-ing to a repository. Users can also be assigned roles for either type
of resource, such as the `"owner"` role for an `Organization` or the
`"maintainer"` role for a `Repository`.

Inside the curly braces of each `resource` block, we declare the roles and
permissions for that resource:

> ```polar

Reviewer: if you wrote this policy would there be errors due to unused permissions & roles? I'm not 100% sure what we validate.

Author: Not at the moment; that's the validation that I spiked out a hacky POC of and then ripped out b/c it's more complicated than we had time to tackle.

  roles = [ "contributor", "maintainer" ];
}
```

<!-- TODO(gj): transition -->

## Grant permissions to roles

Next, we're going to write *shorthand rules* that grant permissions to roles.
For example, if we grant the `"push"` permission to the `"maintainer"` role in
the `Repository` resource block, then a user who's been assigned the
`"maintainer"` role for a particular repository can `"push"` to that
repository. Here's our `Repository` resource block with a few shorthand rules
added:

```polar
resource Repository {
  permissions = [ "read", "push" ];
  roles = [ "contributor", "maintainer" ];

  "push" if "maintainer";
  "read" if "maintainer";
  "read" if "contributor";
}
```

Shorthand rules expand to regular [Polar rules](polar-syntax#rules) when a
policy is loaded. The `"push" if "maintainer"` shorthand rule above expands
to:

```polar
has_permission(actor: Actor, "push", repository: Repository) if
  has_role(actor, "maintainer", repository);
```

{{% callout "Note" "blue" %}}
  Instances of our application's `User` class will match the `Actor`
  [specializer](polar-syntax#specialization) because of our `actor User {}`
  resource block declaration.
{{% /callout %}}

> <!-- TODO(gj): transition -->

Reviewer: Your transition in the next section first sentence seems fine

Author: f768c586

```polar
resource Repository {
  permissions = [ "read", "push" ];
  roles = [ "contributor", "maintainer" ];

  "push" if "maintainer";
  "read" if "contributor";

  "contributor" if "maintainer";
}
```

In addition, any permissions we grant the `"contributor"` role in the future
will automatically propagate to the `"maintainer"` role.

<!-- TODO(gj): better heading -->
## Access role assignments stored in the application

An Oso policy contains authorization *logic*, but the application remains in
control of all authorization *data*. For example, the logic that the
`"maintainer"` role on a repository grants the `"push"` permission lives in the
policy, but Oso doesn't manage the data of which users have been assigned the
`"maintainer"` role for `Repository(id=2)`. That data stays in the application,
and Oso asks the application for it as needed.

The main question Oso asks is: does `User(id=1)` have the `"maintainer"` role
on `Repository(id=2)`? For Oso to be able to ask this question, we need to
implement a `has_role()` rule in the policy:

```polar
has_role(user: User, name: String, resource: Resource) if
  role in user.roles and

>   role matches { name: name, resource: resource };

Reviewer: Not sure about this vs two separate lines because the `matches` operator is less obvious than `=`.

Author: 1e5c9deb

```

`role in user.roles` iterates over a user's assigned roles and `role matches {
name: name, resource: resource }` succeeds if the user has been assigned the
`name` role for `resource`.

{{% callout "Note" "blue" %}}
  The body of this rule will vary according to the way roles are stored in your
  application. The data model for our GitClub example is as follows:

  ```py
  @dataclass(frozen=True)
  class Organization:
      name: str

  @dataclass(frozen=True)
  class Repository:
      name: str
      organization: Organization

  @dataclass(frozen=True)
  class Role:
      name: str
      resource: Union[Repository, Organization]

  @dataclass
  class User:
      name: str
      roles: Set[Role]

      def assign_role_for_resource(self, name, resource):
          self.roles.add(Role(name, resource))
  ```

>   If, for example, repository roles and organization roles were stored

Reviewer: nice example

    role in user.repository_roles and
    role matches { name: name, resource: resource };

  has_role(user: User, name: String, organization: Organization) if
    role in user.organization_roles and
    role matches { name: name, resource: resource };
  ```

{{% /callout %}}

Our `has_role()` rule can check role assignments on repositories and
organizations, but so far we've only talked about repository roles. Let's
change that and see how Oso can leverage parent-child relationships like the
one between `Repository` and `Organization` to grant a role on a child resource
to a role on the parent.

<!-- TODO(gj): better heading -->
## Grant a role on a child resource to a role on the child's parent

If you've used ~GitHub~ *GitClub* before, you know that having a role on an
organization grants certain roles and permissions on that organization's
repositories. For example, a user is granted the `"maintainer"` role on a
repository if they're assigned the `"owner"` role on the repository's parent
organization. This is how you write that rule with Oso:

{{< code file="rbac.polar" >}}
resource Repository {
  # ...

  relations = { parent: Organization };

>   "maintainer" if "owner" on "parent";

Reviewer: Adding some comments in the code block, like:

```
# A user has the "maintainer" role if they have the "owner" role on the parent Organization.
```

can help make the code blocks easy to skip & grok.

Author: 2edac2d9

}

has_relation(organization: Organization, "parent", repository: Repository) if
  organization = repository.organization;
{{< /code >}}

> First, we declare that the `"parent"` relation for a `Repository` is an

Reviewer: I'm not sure it is clear what `is a` means here. Maybe: the "parent" relation for a `Repository` references an `Organization`.

Author: 0a90f0a0

better?

`Organization`:

```polar
relations = { parent: Organization };
```

This is a dictionary where each key is the name of the relation and each value
is the relation's type.

> Next, we write a `has_relation()` rule that tells Oso how to check if an

Reviewer: This ordering of arguments has confused me several times because you write the `relation` declaration on `Repository`, which makes me think `Repository` should be the first argument (not sure why, I guess because `self` usually goes in the first position -- even though this isn't a method maybe that's the analogy in my head)

I wonder if we can add some callout explaining why this is consistent with the way `has_role` and other rules work.

Author: 94f34c9c

organization has the `"parent"` relation with a repository:

```polar
has_relation(organization: Organization, "parent", repository: Repository) if
  organization = repository.organization;
```

<!-- TODO(gj): better phrasing for the next sentence -->
In this case, an organization is the `"parent"` of a repository if the
repository's `organization` field points to it.

Finally, we add a shorthand rule that involves the `"maintainer"` repository
role, the `"owner"` organization role, and the `"parent"` relation between the
two resource types:

```polar

> "maintainer" if "owner" on "parent";

Reviewer: maybe include the resource block again for context here, a bit has passed since the code snippet above

Author: 6652fa00

```

## Add an `allow()` rule

At this point, the policy is almost fully functional. All that's left is adding
an `allow()` rule:

```polar
allow(actor, action, resource) if
  has_permission(actor, action, resource);
```

> This is a typical `allow()` rule for an RBAC policy: an actor is allowed to

Reviewer: Maybe this to be slightly more general? Or policy using permissions? Not sure exactly maybe we need to talk this through

```suggestion
This is a typical `allow()` rule for a policy using resource blocks policy: an actor is allowed to
```

Author: yeah w/o the commented-out line below it's not really specific to RBAC

perform an action on a resource if the actor *has permission* to perform the
action on the resource. <!-- And an actor has permission to perform an action
on a resource if the actor is assigned a role that grants that permission. -->

This `allow()` rule serves as the entrypoint when we query our policy via Oso's
enforcement methods like {{% apiDeepLink class="Oso" %}}authorize{{%
/apiDeepLink %}}:

```py
oso.authorize(User(id=1), "push", Repository(id=2))
```

> ## Baby Got RBAC

Reviewer: lol
